# RECONCILING FOUNDER VARIANT MULTIPLICITY OF HIV-1 INFECTION WITH THE RATE OF CD4+ DECLINE

Leveraging mathematical and statistical models to better understand the influence of HIV multiple founder variants on disease progresssion.


Three quarters of new HIV-1 infections are initiated by a single genetic variant, and infections initiated by multiple variants are linked with higher recipient viral loads and a faster rate CD4+ T cell decline. However, these findings have not been universally replicated and a mechanism through which multiple variants might lead to higher viral loads and a faster rate CD4+ T cell decline is yet to be elucidated. Furthermore, the role of the transmitter’s infection in determining both the number of founder variants initiating infection and the virulence of the infecting virus, is yet to be investigated. In this study, we first summarised the existing evidence for this phenomenon. We then quantified how likely we are to observe a true difference in set point viral load in an observational study, between multiple and single variant infections. We found the probability of observing a significantly greater viral load varied between studies. Specifically, at frequencies of multiple variant infection consistent with empirical observations, we are unlikely to record a significant difference in SpVL between multiple and single variant infections.  Finally, we combined data-driven models of transmission, heritability and HIV-1 disease progression to test whether we expect to observe an association between multiple variant infection and clinical progression, in the absence of an explicitly incorporated causal effect. Our model predicts that we would not expect multiple variant infections to lead to higher SpVL or faster CD4+ T cell decline without a causal mechanism. Although the probability that infection is initiated in a recipient is greatest at the highest transmitter SpVLs, the relatively low contribution of the virus genotype to recipient SpVL precludes a major role in determining the recipient prognosis. This finding supports the hypothesis that a within-patient causal mechanism is required to explain the association of multiple variant infection with higher viral loads and faster CD4+ T cell decline. Further investigation into events happening during and just after transmission are required to enhance our understanding of this association. 

./scripts/main will run the analyses. 
There is the option to export figures to file at the end of this script. 

